Journey of Becoming an Holistic Psychotherapist
By Dan

Spirituality may be viewed as the development of an expanded consciousness and inner awareness’, whereas psychotherapy, in particular Carl Jung’s and Arnold Mindell’s approaches are a self-awareness of the inner factors of one’s intra-psychic processes, and how they relate to the conscious awareness. I believe that it is difficult to understand the evolution of consciousness without understanding the collective unconscious and how we interact with modern day myths. I will limit my discussion predominately to western societies as I have not the time, resources, expertise, experience, or talents to consider the east in-depth. Even though my essay has deviated quite a bit from the reading list, I view that it is important to get my understanding across.

Spirituality in the east is vastly different from spirituality in the west. For thousands of years they have been looking inwards at their own inner natures, cultivating compassion, self-control and learning to live in harmony with nature and her unseen forces. In the west, for the last several thousand years, we have had the Egyptian and Greek mystery schools, Jewish Kabbalah, Esoteric Christianity and Alchemy as our main spiritual traditions, with Eastern philosophies and spirituality only being a recent encounter with the western psyche. These different stances of spirituality have a deep impact on the psyche of Eastern and Western man. Carl Jung describes the Eastern psyche as having an introverted sense of God, and a kundalini that rises upwards. Western man [sic] is described as having an extraverted sense of God, causing him [sic] to look for God outside of himself [sic], and a kundalini that flows downwards to the lower chakras. Carl Jung was the first modern thinker to rediscover the truths of the mystery schools, alchemy, eastern philosophies in western light, and Gnosticism and put them in light of psychology, and to put forward his idea of the collective unconscious. The collective unconscious seems to be our source of spirituality, and our understanding of gods, goddesses and daemons.

The intuition that we have multiple lives is one that is shared amongst various cultures. However, in the west the predominate religions teach that we only live once, and then either enjoy living in Heaven or are condemned to Hell for all eternity. As tempting as it may be to switch off the later viewpoint and focus on the former, we do reside in a western culture where the dominate religion is Christianity which has its effects on our psyche whether we are consciously aware of it or not. These beliefs may only become apparent in extreme states like mania or psychosis, but for most individuals they seem to run as an unchecked spiritual program that is running in the unconscious, or perhaps as Arnold Mindell would describe, a city shadow. 

According to the Judeo-Christian religion, Yahweh created the cosmos, Earth and humanity. At times he displayed the peaks of love, at others he displayed utmost cruelty, especially to poor Job. In Carl Jung’s book, “Answer to Job”, Jung made the argument that Job had moral superiority over Yahweh, which influenced Yahweh’s decision to incarnate as a man. According to [redacted] (personal communication, May 17, 2016) Yaweh became an all good, God-man known today as Jesus Christ. The result of this is that Satan has taken the projected darker aspects of Yahweh on, but since most people deep down don’t really believe in absolute evil, they take on Yahweh’s disowned projections onto themselves. This results in viewing ourselves as quite inferior to, and separate from Jesus, and the perception of others as a possible source of evil intent. This has had a huge impact on the consciousness of western peoples, and society for the last couple of thousands of years.

The female psyche has also had quite an upheaval in the recent past. I’m going to explain the changes using my own inferences from archetypal psychology. Aphrodite is the goddess of love and lust from the Greek pantheon, but more importantly she relates to us as an archetypal pattern within our psyche. She can only be uncovered through a skilled practitioner in some form of depth psychotherapy. In strictly biological terms, she manifests in what is known as sexual selection. Our ancient ancestors took great risks in procreating, in particular females took on majority of this risk, not only during pregnancy but after birth they were to look after the most vulnerable creature in nature. As a result, females have become more selective with their sexual partners than males. This is why the Greeks personified this archetypal pattern as a feminine deity. What happens is that when a woman falls in love with someone, this archetype from the collective unconscious starts to activate, creating strong feelings of being beautiful and sensual (UCSB, 2010). She has been massively suppressed in patriarchal Judeo-Christian societies, in particular at the time of Sigmund Freud’s discoveries of the unconscious which lead to her negative aspects to be exposed. Connecting to this archetypal energy is what gives life it’s spice but it can also be dangerous. By practicing spiritual techniques like mindfulness, meditation of even art, you can start to become aware when this pattern starts to activate which may help your ego-consciousness in holding its own without becoming overwhelmed. I bring this archetypal pattern up in the context of spirituality and psychotherapy as in the last 60 years, there has been a great shift in the consciousness of females. They have become independent of men in securing careers, with the advent of modern contraception techniques, they have been able to come into their sexuality without fears of unwanted pregnancy, and they have been taking on roles that have in the past been seen as male centric roles. With traditional gender roles being eroded, and the psyche being androgynous, people may show up in therapy, whether male, female or other, straight, gay or other, with issues in relation to Aphrodite.

What I have gained from Rudolph Steiner’s awareness is the differing consciousness levels of humanity throughout the cultural epochs is that consciousness developing, in the macrocosm in a similar fashion as it develops in the microcosm of a human being from infancy, to old age. According to Jean Piaget’s cognitive theory, humans go through stages of development (though this is just an intellectual tool to understand development, in practice humans develop in a fluid manner). In the first two years post birth, infants develop their own sense of the world through their senses, and start to realise that objects in the environment have permanence, which results in the solving sensorimotor problems (like looking for lost toys). After the first two years of life, the child enters into the preoperational stage of life where the use of language, symbolic representation, an egocentric view of the world, pretend play. Their thinking lacks what adults would call logic. This stage usually lasts until the child is seven. Next comes the concrete operational stage ranging from seven to 11 years old. The child starts to develop logical reasoning to solve concrete problems, objects start to be classed in a hierarchal fashion, and thinking lacks abstract thought. Then around 11 years, the child goes into the last stage of cognitive development, the formal operational stage where abstract thought becomes differentiated allowing complex problems to be formulated and solved. 

I believe this development of the cognitive structures of the microcosmic human is mirrored in the macrocosm of human evolution as laid out by Rudolf Steiner. During the Indian age (7227-5067bc) they shut off their sense to look within for what they viewed as reality. The ego consciousness was not well differentiated and they saw the world around them as illusion in a similar fashion as a freshly incarnated soul would view the world and follow the wisdom of impermanence. Then we enter into the Persian age (5067-2907bc), and consciousness starts to look outward, but the world is seen as a duality establishing an ego identity. We enter into the Egyptian age, and they use symbolic representations throughout their writing style to convey what they mean. The ego becomes more differentiated; they project the main source of their identity onto the pharaoh who takes on an archetypal parent role. In the temple’s, they interact very closely with the gods and goddesses, and perform plays and dramas involving them. Now we enter into the Greek age where logical reasoning starts to emerge in the form of philosophies, mathematics, science, and abstract writing. Objects are classified in depth by Aristotle. The gods, and goddesses were a large part of their lives but nothing to the extent that they were in the Egyptian cultural epoch. Eventually we arrive at the modern era where the cognitive facilities have become differentiated enough to enable complex engineering to develop from scientific principles. Logical thinking has become quite abstract for the majority of people enabling the masses to understand concepts like algebra. Also, as Nietzsche famously proclaims “God is dead”.

I understand Steiner’s description of thinking, feeling and willing as it relates to the ego, soul and spirit. Thinking is our ego, and is influenced heavily by our feelings through prompting us to consider things as a feeling-tone complex arises. For example, for an individual with an inferiority complex, when a situation arises were someone has power over him, he [sic] is likely to feel inferior, and may use his [sic] cognitions to “overcome”, these unwanted feelings by raising his [sic] self-worth to unwarranted proportions. This is an ego delusion caused by thinking. Feeling is soul, and it is, in my opinion mainly created by the intrinsic memories of early childhood, before speech is formed, and conscious memories have developed. Not only that, but soul connects us to the transpersonal world that we have the intuition of, but dismiss as we grow older. Infants, and the elderly are closest to this realm, and in certain African traditional societies, the grandmother would cause the mother of a new born child to go into an altered state of consciousness, and use the information gained to discover what the soul journey of the child would be. Then there is will, which is used to press on and harness the sometimes ravenous river that is our feeling life. Will can manifest in quite powerful displays or endurance, such as Siddhartha displayed in his five years as an ascetic, before he became the Buddha.

I can’t think of any religious or spiritual system that doesn’t have at its core that life is a journey and we are to develop into the best human beings that we can be, whatever their perception of what is considered best may be, in order to enjoy an afterlife, or the next life. To tamper with this sort of belief would likely deliver an existential depression onto the client. Our own present day development on our personal journey is what contributes to our metaskills. Obviously someone who has a limited, individuated, compassionate side won’t be able to use the metaskill of compassion in a genuine, or effective manner. As the metaskills are related to the feelings or the psychotherapist, it brings us back to the soul and it’s striving to become an individuated entity. A successful psychotherapist will have a keen sense of these inner hunches, and intuitions on what to do during the session with the client and will favour their more developed metaskills. This should bypass the thinking function as it will generally get in the way of successfully utilizing their metaskills. Being, and acting without the prejudice of your thoughts will in itself foster positive change in the client as they will feel they are connected to something they’ve long since been disconnected from. This will “incarnate” your deeper belief’s into living reality. The goals of psychotherapy can be summed up with the philosophy of teleology. It brings that archetypal blueprints of what a thing is now, and what it is to become together. The two aren’t separate self-entities.

We all self-expressions of a force trying to express itself in the cosmos. At the highest levels, we are all one force, whatever name people give this force is a personal choice. In Buddhism, it is the twelve links of interdependent arising that create the sense of separation, namely ignorance (all of the twelve links are a form of ignorance in the Buddhist cosmology), which propels us into incarnation.

A successful psychotherapist learns to live with the inner awareness that come forth. Whether they call it a projection of parts of themselves onto their client, or understanding that they, and other at the highest level aren’t truly separate beings, or they follow the neurological perspective and realise that there are parts of the brain that don’t actually recognise a difference between self, and other is beside the point. What is important is that these impulses may have a significance in the psychotherapy session, and learning to go with the flow of these inclinations has been proven to be very successful by process orientated psychologists like the Mindell’s. 


References

University of California, Santa Barbara. (2010). Aphrodite The Archetype. Retrieved from
	http://www.classics.ucsb.edu/mythF09/Aphrodite.pdf 21/05/2016
