Journey of Becoming an Holistic Psychotherapist
By Dan
“For the collective unconscious we could use the word God. But I prefer not to use big words, I am quite satisfied with humble scientific language because it has the great advantage of bringing that whole experience into our immediate vicinity.”
	Carl G. Jung in a 1933 seminar, as quoted in Edward Edinger, The Creation of Consciousness (Toronto: Inner City Books, 1984), p 66
The holistic human being is largely understood to be the mind-body-spirit connection, which can be understood, in psychological terminology as ego-soma-psyche connection. Spirituality may be viewed as the path to the development of an expanded consciousness and inner awareness of self, whereas psychotherapy, in particular depth psychology and process work approaches self-awareness of the inner factors of one’s intra-psychic processes, and how they relate to the conscious awareness. They are both a journey of the mind-body-spirit becoming increasingly aware of each other. The ego’s relation to the unconscious elements of psyche and soma are, in my view, crucial to the proper understanding of an individual in psychotherapy. I believe that it is difficult to understand an holistic mode of understanding without the myths that we live by, often unconsciously, and how they relate to the individual’s conscious awareness (ego) and the unconscious aspects that they don’t often relate to. In fact, an holistic approach in my view is a superior approach as human beings may not even be capable of being atheists, according to cognitive scientists (Vittachi, 2014).

Spirituality in the east is vastly different from spirituality in the west. For thousands of years, Eastern seekers have been looking inwards at their own inner natures, and becoming one with God, or attaining enlightenment. They have been cultivating desirable personality traits, self-control and learning to live in harmony with nature and her unseen forces. This mode of relating enables an unprecedented level of awareness of the unconscious processes that run in all of us. In the west, for the last several thousand years, we have had various schools of thought dominating each society, from Babylonian, Egyptian and Greek mystery schools, Jewish mysticism and kabbalah, Gnostic Christianity and Alchemy as our main spiritual traditions, with Eastern philosophies and spirituality only being a recent encounter with the western psyche. These different stances of spirituality have a deep impact on the psyche of Eastern and Western peoples. Carl Jung describes the Eastern psyche as having an introverted sense of God, searching for God in their own being, and a kundalini that rises upwards. Western man [sic] is described as having an extraverted sense of God, causing him [sic] to look for God outside of himself [sic], and a kundalini that flows downwards to the lower chakras. The cultural inheritance that a person has will impact on their sense of relating to the world.

In the west, the predominate religions teach that we only live once, and then either enjoy living in Heaven or are condemned to Hell for all eternity. As tempting as it may be to switch off our Judeo-Christian heritage as many attempt to do, we do reside in a western culture where the dominate religion is Christianity which has its effects on the collective whether we are consciously aware of it or not. These beliefs may only become apparent in extreme states like mania or psychosis, but for most individuals they seem to run as an unchecked spiritual program that is running in the unconscious. Freud’s conception of the superego runs close to the western conception of Yahweh, the creator God from Judeo-Christian theology (Meissner, 1986, pp 130). The superego is the aspect of psyche that desires the individual to overcome, in its view, animalistic urges, or instincts, and live a pure life. The Superego isn’t part of your conscious identity so it doesn’t understand the tensions of being human. In psychoanalysis and psychotherapy, it is imperative for the ego to become strong so that it lives the life that is intended without becoming fixated in instinctual impulses or fearful of rigid superego-imposed standards of behaviour.

What I have gained from Rudolph Steiner’s awareness is the differing consciousness levels of humanity throughout the cultural epochs is that consciousness is developing in the macrocosm in a similar fashion as it develops in the microcosm of a human being from infancy, to old age. According to Jean Piaget’s cognitive theory, humans go through stages of development (Hoffnung. et. al., 2013, pp 48). In the first two years post birth, infants develop their own sense of the world through their senses, and start to realise that objects in the environment have permanence, which results in the solving sensorimotor problems (like looking for lost toys) (Hoffnung. et. al., 2013, pp 48). After the first two years of life, the child enters into the preoperational stage of life where the use of language, symbolic representation, an egocentric view of the world, pretend play develop (Hoffnung. et. al., 2013, pp 48). Their thinking lacks what adults would call logic (Hoffnung. et. al., 2013, pp 48). This stage usually lasts until the child is seven (Hoffnung. et. al., 2013, pp 48). Next comes the concrete operational stage ranging from seven to 11 years old (Hoffnung. et. al., 2013, pp 48). The child starts to develop logical reasoning to solve concrete problems, objects start to be classed in a hierarchal fashion, and thinking lacks abstract thought (Hoffnung. et. al., 2013, pp 48). Then around 11 years, the child goes into the last stage of cognitive development, the formal operational stage where abstract thought becomes differentiated allowing complex problems to be formulated and solved (Hoffnung. et. al., 2013, pp 48). 

I believe this development of the cognitive structures of the microcosmic human is mirrored in the macrocosm of human evolution as laid out by Rudolf Steiner. During the Indian age (7227-5067bc) they shut off their sense to look within for what they viewed as reality (Nielson, 2016). I postulate that the ego consciousness was not well differentiated, and they saw the world around them as an illusion in a similar fashion as a freshly incarnated soul, or baby would view the world and follow the wisdom of impermanence. Then we enter into the Persian age (5067-2907bc), and consciousness starts to look outward, but the world is seen as a duality (Nielson, 2016), which I believe aids in establishing an ego identity. We then enter into the Egyptian age, and they use symbolic representations throughout their writing style to convey what they mean. The ego becomes more differentiated; they project the main source of their identity onto the pharaoh who takes on an archetypal parent role. In the temple’s, they interact very closely with the gods and goddesses, and perform rituals involving them (UCL, 2002). Now we enter into the Greek age where logical reasoning starts to emerge in the form of philosophies, mathematics, science, and abstract writing. Objects are classified in depth by Aristotle (Ken Wilbur, 2011). The gods, and goddesses were a large part of their lives but nothing to the extent that they were in the Egyptian cultural epoch. Eventually we arrive at the modern era where the cognitive facilities have become differentiated enough to enable complex technology to develop from scientific principles (Nielson, 2016). Logical thinking has become quite differentiated for the majority of people enabling the masses to understand concepts like algebra. Also, at the beginning of the 20th century Nietzsche famously proclaims “God is dead” symbolising the death of God in the hearts of humans (Curran, 2005). You could think of the spiritual elements of a human being, in the modern intellectual era, as being in a slumber, or disowned and in need of being integrated into the conscious awareness which is increasingly becoming the role of the psychotherapist rather than the clergymen (Jung, 1933, pp. 22?) 

I understand Steiner’s description of thinking, feeling and willing as it relates to the ego (personality), soul (subconscious) and spirit (collective unconscious). Thinking is closest to our ego, and is influenced heavily by our feelings by prompting us to consider things as a feeling-tone complex arises. For example, for an individual with an inferiority complex, when a situation arises where someone has power over him, he is likely to feel inferior, and may use his cognitions to “overcome” these unwanted feelings by raising his self-worth to unwarranted proportions. This is an ego delusion (inflation) caused by thinking. Feeling is soul, and it is, in my opinion mainly created by the intrinsic memories of early childhood, before speech and conscious memories have formed, the seat of the complexes. Not only that, but soul connects us to the transpersonal world (collective unconscious) that we have the intuition of. Then there is will, which is used to press on and harness the sometimes ravenous river that is our feeling life. Will can manifest in quite powerful displays or endurance, such as Siddhartha displayed in his five years as an ascetic, before he became the Buddha. In psychotherapy, thinking can be used to turn the awareness to something that is less painful, rather than assuming the past will be repeated in the future, in a cyclic manner. Feeling is the way individuals relate to their inner impulses and interpersonal relations, which requires an understanding of how soma and relationships are related. Willing can be used to get over the hard aspects of change that so many avoid out of fear of the unknown.

I can’t think of any religious or spiritual system that doesn’t have at its core that life is a journey and we are to develop into the best human beings that we can be, whatever their perception of what is considered best may be, in order to enjoy an afterlife, or next life. To tamper with this sort of belief would likely create a feeling of hopelessness and deliver an existential depression onto the client (Grohol, 2015). 

Amy Mindell states “Deep spiritual attitudes and beliefs manifest in therapy and in everyday life” (Mindell, 1995, pp 15) and the feeling attitudes that arise from these beliefs are what is known as our metaskills (Mindell, 1995, pp 15). A really good psychotherapist will use the metaskill of compassion in a genuine and effective manner (Mindell, 1995). As the metaskills are related to the feelings of the psychotherapist, it brings us back to the soul and it’s striving to become an individuated entity. A successful psychotherapist will have a keen sense of these inner hunches, and intuitions on what to do during the session with the client and will favour their more developed metaskills. This should bypass the thinking function as it will generally get in the way of successfully utilising their metaskills. Being, and acting without the prejudice of your thoughts will in itself foster positive change in the client as they will feel they are connected to something they’ve long since been disconnected from. This will “incarnate” your deeper belief’s into living reality. The goals of psychotherapy can be summed up with the philosophy of teleology. It brings that archetypal blueprints of what a thing is now, and what it is to become together. The two aren’t separate entities.

My personal philosophy is that we all are self-expressions of a force trying to express itself in the cosmos, or become individuated. At the highest levels, we are all one energy, and whatever name people give this energy is a personal choice. As Jung puts it, “How can a human being stand the tension of feeling himself [sic] at one with the whole universe, while at the same time he [sic] is only a miserable earthly human creature? If, on the one hand, I despise myself as merely a statistical cipher, my life has no meaning and is not worth living. But if, on the other hand, I feel myself to be part of something much greater, how am I to keep my feet on the ground? It is very difficult indeed to keep these inner opposites united within oneself without toppling over into one or the other extreme” (Carl Jung, Man and his Symbols). 

A successful psychotherapist learns to live with the inner awareness that comes forth, both in the personal journey and in the counselling encounter. They understand that humans are at different personal stages of growth that is constantly evolving. They understand that the human being is a multifaceted, individual with a personal soul yet a collective spirit. What is important is that learning to go with the flow of certain inclinations has been proven to be very successful by process orientated psychologists like the Mindell’s. 

William W. Meissner Psychoanalysis and Religious Experience Yale University Press, 1986

http://www.science20.com/writer_on_the_edge/blog/scientists_discover_that_atheists_might_not_exist_and_thats_not_a_joke-139982

http://www.ucl.ac.uk/museums-static/digitalegypt/religion/dailycult.html
Copyright © 2002 University College London. All rights reserved.

https://www.csudh.edu/dearhabermas/goddead01.htm

Grohol, J. (2015). What is Existential Depression?. Psych Central. Retrieved on July 6, 2016, from http://psychcentral.com/lib/what-is-existential-depression/
