Core Process Oriented Skills
Dan

Chris and I practiced using our rudimentary acquired knowledge of process work on each other in a psychotherapy session on each other over Skype. I found the situation to be quite rewarding and learned about certain aspects of myself that I’m not always consciously aware of, however, I do sometimes become aware of these underlining behaviours so they aren’t clear cut secondary processes, but somewhere on a spectrum, close to the secondary process polarity. There were also times were I felt uncomfortable, but knew that I was uncovering aspects of myself that wanted to be felt, and then seen and interacted with.

Chris and I started the session with me explaining certain relational situations that have been going on for me for some time.  After I explained the interpersonal dynamics to him, he asked me to scan my body to notice any peculiarities that may have arisen. The first thing I noticed was my forehead had some form of pressure on it, which prompted Chris to narrow down what kind of pressure it was and exactly where in the forehead this pressure was coming from. I singled out a certain area on the right side of my forehead just to the right of my brow and the pressure felt was an experience of something simultaneously pressuring to come out and forced in. Neurologically, I associate this area with where emotions are processed. Chris then asked me to close my eyes and meditate to see what is prompted into my conscious awareness. A vision of a young girl emerged, wearing a white dress and playing near a white picket fence, it was a sunny day. She was wanting to come over, but she preoccupied with playing, also the fence got larger when she came near it. She was ambivalent. After sharing this with Chris, he inquired what was on the other side of the fence. So I took my awareness over there. It was night time all the time there. There were swings and slides but no one was playing with them. Chris got me to check in with my body again which made me feel a sharpness in my chest where the sternum is, or were I perceive the heart chakra is located. Chris now asked me to amplify the sharpness in the chest which I reluctantly did. I then was transported back to the scene with the white fence and it was rapidly going up and down. I tried to get a male figure which I more closely identify with across while the fence was down low but he got stuck, but with Chris’ aid and a few attempts, I managed to get him across to the other side where he arrived at a jungle, sort of like the African planes. I then noticed my wallpaper behind the Skype window had changed itself, as it periodically does, to an African savannah, but wasn’t sure if that had happened before or after the reverie. I was now an explorer in an unknown territory. Chris thought this was a good place to end the session and I agreed.

This experience opened me up to a lot of identified and unidentified aspects of myself. It started off in the relationship channel as we were discussing my interpersonal issues. But when Chris encouraged me to do a body scan, it moved into the proprioceptive channel, explicitly in an area that I identified as being related with the processing of emotions. Considering that I have long known most of my emotional difficulties are due to poor interpersonal relations, this connection makes quite a lot of sense. I can at times become quite preoccupied by the poorly processed, painful expressions of feelings of hurt. This is when the channel shifted into the visual channel with the formation of the little girl, an inner dream figure. The little girl is quite far from my conscious identity. I believe she has come and gone in dreams for quite some time, but not too commonly. She is playful which is a side of my conscious identity that I would do well in cultivating and making more of a primary process out of. Her youth might indicate her undeveloped nature, but this is speculation. The fence is a boundary between the masculine, more on the primary process side of the spectrum, aspect of myself and the feminine, close to secondary process polarity. I felt an edge when I checked into my body for the second time as I was aware I have awakened a deep issue for me and am quite disconnected from my body and stay in the head a lot. I also felt an edge during the visual of the lonely man trying to get over the fence. I didn’t want to inhibit him, but wasn’t sure what he would experience on the other side. I guess that is why he had trouble getting over. I now am quite enticed by the prospect of my inner masculine exploring a new, unknown territory. To fully integrate this experience into my life involves a three pronged assimilation where I feel into my body more, process my emotions in a healthier way, and see interpersonal relations as an explorer must feel when he lands on a new land that he hasn’t seen before. I believe by cultivating all three simultaneously, they will support each other.
